
Figure 2:
Subjects adjusted their behavior based on trial outcome. (A) Mean lick density across sessions as a function of time for the left and right spouts, averaged separately from trials in which the sound cue was an upsweep (top row) or downsweep (bottom row), and outcome was single reward (solid), double reward (dotted) or omitted reward (dashed). Black error bar, 95% confidence interval for time of outcome. (B) Fraction of trials missed immediately following each outcome. Gray triangles, individual sessions. Black crosshairs, mean ± SEM. Wilcoxon signed-rank test: *P < 0.05, **P < 0.005, n.s., not significant. (C) Fraction of trials with a correct response immediately following each outcome.

Figure 3:
Two-photon calcium imaging of choice- and outcome-related signals in secondary motor cortex (M2). (A) Schematic representation of experimental setup for behavior with simultaneous two-photon imaging. (B) Schematic representation of preparation for in vivo two-photon imaging of M2. PrL, prelimbic cortex; Cg1, cingulate area 1; M1, primary motor cortex. (C) An example field-of-view in layer 2/3 of M2 containing GCaMP6s-expressing neurons. The image is a mean projection of the full time-lapse image stack from Experiment 13 in Table 1. (D) Mean fluorescence traces from an example cell, aligned to the sound cue and averaged across different subsets of trials. In the leftmost three panels, traces from left (red) and right (blue) trials are overlaid for each trial outcome. The rightmost two panels display the same data, with traces from single- (solid), double- (dotted) and omitted-reward trials (dashed) overlaid for each chosen action. Shading, 90% confidence interval. (E–F) Same as D for two additional cells.

Figure 4:
Sustained representations of choices and their outcomes in M2. (A) A schematic representation of the multiple linear regression model that was fit to the fluorescence of each neuron in each 500 ms time bin. (B) The proportion of cells with significant choice-dependent activity as quantified by the regression model, plotted as a function of time. The regression model accounted for the influence of choices made on the current trial (left), the last trial (middle) and the trial before last (right), as well as the additional predictors shown in C–D. Significance of each predictor was tested at α = 0.01. Black bars, bins in which the proportion of cells with significant regression coefficients was above chance level (P < 0.01, binomial test). Gray shading, the significance threshold for the binomial test. Black error bar, 95% CI for time of outcome. N = 771 cells from 16 sessions from 10 mice. (C) Same as B for trial outcome. (D) Same as B for the interaction of choice and outcome. (E) The proportion of neurons with a significant regression coefficient for the choice made in the current trial only, in the prior trial only, and in both the current and prior trials. (F) Scatter plot of the neurons with significant regression coefficients for both the current and prior choice. The coefficient for the current choice, a1, is plotted against the coefficient for the prior choice, a2. Right inset, the same plot expanded to show the five data points outside the range of the main axis.

Figure 5:
Choice representations in M2 are modified by trial outcome. (A) Heat map of trial-averaged fluorescence as a function of time for all choice-selective neurons during single-reward, left trials. Cells are sorted by the center-of-mass of their trial-averaged fluorescence traces. n = 226 cells with significant encoding of choice or an interaction of choice and outcome as determined by multiple linear regression (see Methods). (B) Heat map of choice selectivity for the neurons in A as a function of time during single-reward trials. Choice selectivity was calculated as the normalized difference between mean fluorescence traces from left and right trials. Red and blue shadings indicate preference for left and right choices, respectively. Cells are sorted first by mean choice preference and then by the center-of-mass of their choice selectivity traces. (C) Scatter plot of the neurons in A, plotting the choice selectivity of each cell in omitted-reward trials against double-reward trials. CC, Pearson correlation coefficient. (D) Empirical cumulative distribution of choice selectivity magnitudes for double-reward (solid) and omitted-reward (dotted) trials.

Figure 6:
The accuracy of decoding chosen actions from the neural ensemble activity is diminished during omitted-reward and error trials. Choices were decoded using classifiers based on linear discriminant analysis, and accuracy was estimated with Monte Carlo cross-validation (repeated random subsampling). (A) The accuracy of decoding choices made on single-reward trials (left), or trials in which the previous outcome was single reward (right), plotted as a function of time. Data are presented as mean ± SEM. Chance-level accuracy (black dashed line) was determined by testing classifiers constructed using shuffled choices. Black horizontal bars, bins significantly different from chance (P < 0.05, Wilcoxon signed-rank test). Black error bar, 95% confidence interval for time of outcome. (B-D) Same as A for double-reward, omitted-reward, and error trials. Results from single-reward trials are overlaid for visual comparison (gray triangles). Lower gray bars, bins with a significant difference in decoding accuracy relative to single-reward trials. (E) Mean decoding accuracy across all time-points shown in A–D for each trial outcome. Gray triangles, individual sessions. Black crosshairs, mean ± SEM. Wilcoxon signed-rank test: **P < 0.01; n.s., not significant. (F) Same as E using random forest classifiers.

Figure 7:
Simultaneous recording imparts a decoding advantage that increases as a function of ensemble size. The accuracy of decoding choices from the activity of simultaneously imaged ensembles of neurons was compared to that of pseudo-ensembles in which simultaneity was disrupted by shuffling the activity traces from each neuron across trials in which the same choice was made. Only correct trials resulting in a single reward were used for this analysis. Classification accuracy was tested using Monte Carlo cross-validation (repeated random subsampling). Chance-level accuracy was determined by testing classifiers constructed using shuffled choices. (A) Pearson correlation matrix for all cells from one example session, under three conditions: with simultaneity preserved (‘ensemble’), after shuffling across trials with the same chosen action (‘pseudo-ensemble’), and after shuffling across trials irrespective of chosen action (‘full scramble’). Correlations were estimated from cellular fluorescence averaged over the interval from 2 to 4 s following cue onset. (B) Histogram of the Pearson correlation coefficients estimated for all pairs of cells imaged in all experiments, using simultaneous ensembles (top) and pseudo-ensembles (bottom). (C) Mean pairwise correlation (left), and pairwise correlation magnitude (right) across all sessions. Gray lines, means from individual sessions. Black crosshairs, grand mean ± SEM. (D) Performance of decoders based on linear discriminant analysis, plotted as a function of time for single-reward trials (left), or trials in which the previous outcome was a single reward (right). Accuracy of ensemble classifiers (black circles) is overlaid with that of pseudo-ensemble classifiers (red triangles) for visual comparison. Black dashed line, chance-level accuracy. (E) Decoder performance as a function of the number of cells used to decode the chosen action. Performance of ensemble (black circles) and pseudo-ensemble (red triangles) classifiers was estimated as the mean classification accuracy over the interval from 2 to 4 s following cue onset in single-reward trials. The number of cells was varied from 1 to 30 by drawing cells randomly from the full ensemble or pseudo-ensemble without replacement. Black dashed line, chance-level accuracy. Horizontal bars, bins in which ensemble (black, upper bar) or pseudo-ensemble (red, lower bar) classifiers performed significantly better than chance (P < 0.05, Wilcoxon signed-rank test). (F) Marginal percentage point change in decoding accuracy, plotted as a function of ensemble size for ensembles (black) and pseudo-ensembles (red). (G) Difference in accuracy of the ensemble and pseudo-ensemble decoders shown in E–F, plotted as a function ensemble size. Black horizontal bars, bins in which the accuracy of ensemble and pseudo-ensemble classifiers differed significantly (P < 0.05, Wilcoxon signed-rank test). (H–K) Same as D–G for random forest classifiers. Data in D–K are presented as mean ± SEM.