
Behavioral performance of head-fixed mice in an adaptive sensorimotor decision-making task.
(a) Schematic of experiment. Each trial begins with an auditory cue. A response window starts 0.5 s after cue onset, during which the first lick is recorded as the response for that trial. Water reward is delivered contingent on a correct response. ITI, intertrial interval. (b) Schematic of stimulus–response mappings and block design. (c) Behavioral performance surrounding a block switch from action to sound (left) or sound to action (right). Filled circles, hit rate. Open circles, perseverative error rate. Dotted line, other error rate. Mean ± s.e.m. of 33 action to sound switches and 38 sound to action switches. (d) Performance from one example behavioral session. Trial outcomes: correct (filled circles), perseverative (Per.) error (open circles), other error (open triangles), or miss (cross). Vertical line, block switch. (e) Left and right lick rates for upsweep or downsweep sound cues during all correct sound-guided (black), action-left (red) and action-right (blue) trials. For each choice direction, lick rates in action trials were compared with those in sound trials in 0.1 s bins; black bars, significant differences (P < 0.01, paired t-test). Lines, mean; shading, ± s.e.m. n = 9 sessions from 5 mice.

Fig2
Bilateral inactivation of secondary motor cortex impairs adjustment to sound-guided trials.
(a) Schematic of experiment. (b) Task performance after bilateral infusion of saline vehicle (Veh) or muscimol (Mus) into M2. (c) Effects of muscimol infusion on action-to-sound and sound-to-action block shifts. Gray lines, individual paired experiments. Bars, mean ± s.e.m. Wilcoxon signed-rank test, action-to-sound: trials to criterion, P = 0.042, W = 10; perseverative errors, P = 0.042, W = 10; other errors, P = 0.5, W = 24. Sound-to-action: trials to criterion, P = 0.054, W = 55; perseverative errors, P = 0.12, W = 51; other errors, P = 0.06, W = 46. n = 11 mice.

Fig3
Two-photon calcium imaging of task-related activity in secondary motor cortex.
(a,b) Example post hoc (a) and in vivo two-photon (b) images of GCaMP6s-expressing neurons in layer 2/3 of M2. PrL, prelimbic cortex; IL, infralimbic cortex. (c) Fractional fluorescence changes (ΔF/F) in example M2 neurons during performance of sound-guided trials. Vertical lines indicate the time of response associated with correct left (solid black), correct right (dotted black), or incorrect (magenta) trials. Scale bars, 10 s and 100% ΔF/F. (d) Trial-averaged ΔF/F of four M2 neurons for correct left (solid line) and correct right (dotted line) responses in sound-guided (black) and action-guided (red) trials. Cell 1 corresponds to the top trace in c. Lines, mean. Gray shading, 95% confidence intervals.

Fig4
Transitions in ensemble activity occur earlier and are more abrupt following switch to sound-guided trials.
(a) Schematic illustrating ensemble activity dynamics around a block switch. Each curved line represents a single-trial neural trajectory deduced from calcium imaging data. When contingencies switch, neural trajectories move within the representational space. Trial-by-trial location of ensemble activity patterns was determined by calculating a ratio of Mahalanobis distances, dorigin/(dorigin + ddest), where dorigin and ddest are the Mahalanobis distance from neural trajectory in the current trial to those of the 20 trials pre-switch for the last and current blocks, respectively. (b) Two switches from action to sound blocks. Top, trial outcomes: correct (filled circles), perseverative error (P-error, open circles), and other error (O-error, open triangles). Bottom, trial-by-trial location of ensemble activity patterns. Dots, Mahalanobis distance ratios for individual trials. Lines, fit to logistic functions. Up arrows, behavioral transition trials. Down arrows, neural transition trials. (c) Same as b for two switches from sound to action blocks. Vertical axis is inverted for presentation purposes. (d) Parameters extracted by fitting action-to-sound neural transitions with the logistic function. Arrows, median values. (e) Neural transition trials plotted against behavioral transition trials (Online Methods) for action-to-sound switches. Each symbol represents one block switch. Symbol shapes denote different sessions (Supplementary Fig. 6). Large circle, median value. (f) Mean hit and error rates at the behavioral trial corresponding to specific neural transition locations as estimated by the logistic fit for each action-to-sound transition. Circles, mean ± s.e.m. (g–i) Same as d–f for switches from sound to action block; red arrows, median values; black arrows in g shown for comparison with c. Wilcoxon rank-sum test: for midpoint trial, xo, P = 0.007, z = 2.70; for steepness, k, P = 0.03, z = –2.17; *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01. Difference in range (L) was not significant (median L, sound: 0.36, action: 0.38; P = 0.8, z = 0.28). Rightmost bar of the histogram includes all instances above the range. n = 33 action-to-sound and 35 sound-to-action switches from 9 sessions from 5 mice.

Fig5
Multiple strategies are associated with distinct population activity patterns.
(a) Neuronal circuit trajectories for 56 simultaneously imaged cells in one experiment. Trajectories determined from trial-averaged ΔF/F for 44 correct left (solid line) and 59 correct right (dotted line) responses in sound-guided trials. Open circles, time (t) of response. Filled circles, 3 and 6 s after response. PC, principal component. (b) Same axes as a, with additional trajectories from 51 correct action-left (red) and 51 correct action-right (blue) trials. Left, trajectories calculated using trial-averaged ΔF/F. Right, 3 representative single-trial trajectories from each trial type. (c) Median accuracy of decoding trial type from individual population activity vectors. S, sound; AL, action-left; AR, action-right. Open triangles, individual experiments; filled triangles, mean ± s.e.m.; dotted line, chance-level accuracy. (d) Temporal dependence of ensemble decoding accuracy. Gray, individual experiments. Black, mean. Dotted line, chance-level accuracy. (e) Median accuracy of decoding trial type from fluorescence transients of single neurons. Green circles, trial-type-selective cells; i.e., 95% percentile confidence intervals are above chance level of 33.3%. Black circles, other cells. Black line, mean decoding accuracy using ensemble activity. Dotted line, chance-level accuracy. (f,g) Same as b,c for trials in which stimulus was upsweep, choice was left, outcome was reward for the current trial and choice was left for the prior trial. Trial type could be decoded well above chance (sound: 87 ± 5%, action-left: 88 ± 5%; versus chance level of 50%, P = 7 × 10−5, 7 × 10−5, t8 = 7.50, 7.52, one-sample t-test). (h,i) Same as b,c for trials in which stimulus was downsweep, choice was right, outcome was reward for the current trial and choice was right for the prior trial. Trial type could be decoded well above chance (sound: 85 ± 5%, action-right: 86 ± 4%; vs. chance level of 50%, P = 7 × 10−5, 8 × 10−6, t8 = 7.54, 10.01, one-sample t-test). n = 9 sessions from 5 mice.

Fig6
M2 ensembles revisit previous activity patterns upon re-exposure to corresponding trial type.
(a) Neural circuit trajectories calculated from trial-averaged ΔF/F for each trial block during one behavioral session. Circled numbers, temporal order in which trial blocks were presented. Open circles, time of response. Black, sound-guided. Blue, action-right. Red, action-left. (b) Normalized distance between neural circuit trajectories from different trial types across all experiments (Online Methods) for sound (S), action-left (AL) and action-right (AR). Open triangles, median distances from individual experiments. Solid triangles, mean ± s.e.m. Wilcoxon signed-rank test: S–S vs. AL–AL: P = 0.6, W = 3; S–S vs. AR–AR: P = 0.5, W = 13; S–S vs. S–AL: P = 0.004, W = 0; S–S vs. S–AR: P = 0.004, W = 0; S–S vs. AL–AR: P = 0.004, W = 0; **P < 0.01. n = 9 sessions from 5 mice, except for AL–AL (n = 4) and AR–AR (n = 8) because mice did not perform enough switches to experience the same block type again in some sessions. **P < 0.01; n.s., not significant.

Fig7
Comparison between neural activity patterns in M2, ALM, and V1 during flexible sensorimotor behavior.
(a) Multiple linear regression analysis was used to evaluate the fraction of 562 M2 neurons encoding choice signals as a function of time. Regression was performed with a moving window (duration = 0.5 s, step = 0.5 s) to test for significance with α = 0.01 on all sound-guided trials where current and prior outcomes were hits (i.e., R(n) = 1 and R(n – 1) = 1). Black bars, significant fractions (P < 0.01, binomial test). Gray shading, significance level of 0.01. Dotted line in the middle panel, fraction of cells significant for the interaction term C(n) × C(n – 1). n = 9 sessions from 5 mice. (b) Same as a for 518 ALM neurons. n = 8 sessions from 4 mice. (c) Same as a for 227 V1 neurons. n = 4 sessions from 2 mice. (d) Median accuracy of decoding trial type from individual population activity vectors restricted to matched trials, comparing M2, ALM and V1 ensembles. For S:AL, sound and action-left trial types were decoded from trials where stimulus was upsweep, choice was left, outcome was reward for the current trial and choice was left for the prior trial. For S:AR, sound and action-right trial types were decoded from trials where stimulus was downsweep, choice was right, outcome was reward for the current trial and choice was right for the prior trial. Trial type was decoded with high accuracy using ensemble activity from M2 (matched sound: action-left trials: 84 ± 4%, t8 = 8.37; P = 3 × 10−5; matched sound: action-right trials: 81 ± 2%, t8 = 12.73; P = 1 × 10−6; versus chance level of 50%, one-sample t-test). Open triangles, individual experiments. Filled triangles, mean ± s.e.m. Dotted line, chance-level accuracy. (e) Neural transition parameters obtained by fitting action-to-sound (black) and sound-to-action (red) transitions with the logistic function, comparing M2 and ALM ensembles. Wilcoxon rank-sum test, sound vs. action, M2: midpoint trial (xo), P = 0.007, z = 2.70; k, P = 0.03, z = –2.17; height (L), P = 0.8, z = 0.28; ALM: xo, P = 0.11, z = 1.62; k, P = 0.4, z = 0.89; L, P = 0.51, z = –0.65. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; n.s., not significant. Filled circles, medians. Lines end at 25th and 75th percentiles.

FigS1
Summary of behavioral performance for mice in imaging experiments.
(a) Task performance for mice during M2 imaging experiments. Open triangles, individual experiments. Filled triangles, mean±s.e.m. n = 9 sessions from 5 mice. (b) Same as (a) for ALM imaging experiments. n = 8 sessions from 4 mice. (c) Same as (a) for V1 imaging experiments. n = 4 sessions from 2 mice.

FigS2
Slower first lick times for trials that were incongruent with the stimulus–response contingencies of the prior block.
(a) The difference in mean first lick times (see Methods for definition) between left and right responses for perseverative hit trials during sound block. Open triangle, individual experiment. Filled triangle, mean±s.e.m. This plot shows that a mouse could respond faster to either left or right lick port. The differences could be due to a combination of factors including placement of the lick ports and the internal bias of the animal. (b) Schematic illustrating perseverative hit, other hit, and perseverative error trials. (c) Based on the analysis in (a), either left or right is denoted as the fast direction. The mean first lick times for the fast direction are plotted for perseverative hit (pHit), other hit (oHit), and perseverative error (pErr) trials occurring during pre-switch (20 trials before block switch) or post-switch (20 trials after block switch) condition. The Wilcoxon signed-rank test was used to assess differences between pHit trials and oHit or pErr trials in the same block type. We also tested sound versus action blocks, and found no significant differences for any comparisons of the same trial types (p>0.05, Wilcoxon signed-rank test). Line, individual experiments. Filled triangles, mean±s.e.m (d) Same as (c) except reporting the average of mean first lick time for the fast and slow directions for each experiment. There were no significant differences for any comparisons of the same trial types between sound and action blocks (p>0.05, Wilcoxon signed-rank test). (e) Same as Fig. 1e, except using only the 20 trials pre-switch. (f) Same as Fig. 1e, except using only the 20 trials post-switch. n = 9 sessions from 5 mice.

FigS3
Video tracking of whisker and hindpaw positions during the adaptive decision-making task.
(a) Still frame from a video taken using an infrared webcam. One whisker on each side of the face was painted using a phosphorescent paint marker (cat. #222-C-GO, Marvy Uchida). Whiskers were illuminated by two infrared light-emitting diodes (IR-LED). A third IR-LED was programmed to turn on 1 s before auditory cues, so the video could be synchronized to the task events. When the room light was turned off, the reflected infrared light could be visualized by the webcam. (b) Mean position of the left and right whiskers for different trial conditions for subject M12. These traces were averaged across pre-switch, correct trials. For this analysis, each whisker was converted to a binary mask based on pixel intensity. The centroid of the mask was located in each frame, and then a line was fitted between the centroid and a fixed point on the face. The angle between the fitted line and the horizontal axis is reported, with positive deflections being protractions and negative deflections being retractions of the whisker. (c) Same as (b) for another subject, M13. (d) Still frame from a video showing a painted hind paw. The webcam was positioned under the animal, to record footage through the acrylic tube. The synchronization IR-LED is visible. (e) Mean x- and y- positions of the right hindpaw for different trial conditions for subject M12. Hindpaw and whisker data were obtained from two different behavioral sessions.

FigS4
Approximating the spread of muscimol during inactivation experiments by injecting low-molecular-weight fluorescein.
Fluorescein (disodium salt, MW=412; #S25328, Fisher Scientific) was injected bilaterally into M2, at the same concentration and volume used for muscimol (5 mM, 46 nL per hemisphere). Animal was euthanized at about the time when behavioral testing would have occurred (1 hr after injections) via transcardial perfusion, and the brain was immediately sectioned with a vibratome. Using a wide-field fluorescence microscope, five images were taken for each brain slice and then stitched together to generate the figures. The image series was fitted to wireframes from the Paxinos and Franklin mouse atlas. These results showed a spread of ~1 mm along the anterior-posterior axis. The fluorescein dye was largely restricted to M2 and Cg1.

FigS5
Bilateral inactivation of M2 has no effect on mean lick rate or first lick response time.
(a) Same analysis as Fig. 1e using data from saline- (black, red, blue) and muscimol-injected (overlaid in green) mice. Lick rates in each rule-sensory-motor combination were compared between saline and muscimol conditions for each 0.1 s bin, and the bars at the top of the panels denote significant differences (p<0.01, t-test; only 4 bins had significant difference by this measure, and none were consecutive bins). Line, mean. Shading, ±s.e.m. (b) Same analysis as Supplementary Fig. 2c, using data from the saline- (black, red) and muscimol-injected (green) mice. The Wilcoxon signed-rank test was used to assess differences between saline and muscimol conditions. n = 11 mice.

FigS6
Relationship between task parameters and neural/behavioral transitions.
(a) Ensemble transition trials plotted against the behavioral transition trial from the same block (see Methods for definition of transition trials). Each point represents one block switch. Bold circle, median value. Left panel: n = 33 switches to a sound block from 9 sessions from 5 mice. Right panel: n = 35 switches to a spatial block from 9 sessions from 5 mice. Symbols denote the different experimental sessions. (b) Same as (a), except symbols denote the subjects tested. (c) Same as (a), except symbol sizes denote the number of other errors in the block. (d) Same as (a), except symbol sizes denote the number of perseverative errors in the block.

FigS7
Strategy-specific differences in decoding accuracy and neural trajectory separation are not due to differences in trial conditions.
(a, c) Same analysis as performed for Fig. 5d except using only the subset of trials with matched trial conditions. (b, d) Same analysis as performed for Fig. 5e except using only the subset of trials with matched trial conditions. (e, f) Same analysis as performed for Fig. 6b except using only the subset of trials with matched trial conditions. The Wilcoxon signed-rank test was used to test for significance, and the p-values are noted in the figure. n = 9 sessions from 5 mice.

FigS8
Choice selectivity for neurons in M2, ALM and V1.
(a) Selectivity for current choice was quantified by calculating the normalized ΔF/F difference during pre-switch, sound-guided trials. Each row represents an M2 neuron. Only M2 neurons that were significant for current choice, C(n), at t = 3 s from response are plotted. Cells are sorted by their choice selectivity. n = 9 sessions from 5 mice. (b) Same as (a) for ALM. n = 8 sessions from 4 mice. (c) Same as (a) for V1. Neurons that were significant for current choice, C(n), at t = 1 s from response are plotted. n = 4 sessions from 2 mice.

FigS9
Summary of behavioral and neural results.
A summary of the task, behavioral performance, and neural dynamics. Recovery of behavioral performance following a switch was approximated as an exponential function for this schematic. The plots were generated based on the median values of behavioral transition trial (sound: 19.0, action: 17.5; dotted lines), neural transition trial (sound: 5.1, action: 14.6), midpoint trial (sound: 4.0, action: 10.4), steepness (sound: 1.02, action: 0.35), and range (sound: 0.36, action: 0.38).
